# Changelog

All notable changes to this project will be documented in this file.

The format is based on [Keep a Changelog](https://keepachangelog.com/en/1.1.0/),
and this project adheres to [Semantic
Versioning](https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html).



## [Unreleased]

### Added

#### HexPages

- Created HexPages, or 1-page hexagons subdivided into smaller ones. There are
  two main chains of magnification: miles-based and leagues-based.
- Miles-based chain
  - 120-mi, subdivided into 30-mi and 3-mi
  - 3-mi, subdivided into 240-yd and 60-yd
  - 240-yd, subdivided into 60-yd and 6-yd
  - 60-yd, subdivided into 30-ft and 3-ft
- Leagues-based chain (1 league = 4,800 yards)
  - 44-le, subdivided into 2-le
  - 2-le, subdivided into 600-yd and 60-yd
  - 600-yd, subdivided into 60-yd and 6-yd
  - 60-yd, same as miles-based chain
- As with the IcoPages, these magnifications were made in a set using the Futura
  font and another using Jost*.

#### Python

- Script for editing grid coordinates generated by `mkhexgrid.exe` into
  Cartesian numbers with a (0,0) origin at the center.

### Fixed

#### IcoPages

- Moved version number text from the globe diagram to the scale.
- Redefined the Inkscape rectangular grid to place its origin in the center of
  the page.

#### Python

- Some adjustments to the sample data were made in fine-tuning the HexPages.



## [1.0] - 2023-08-18

First commit

### Added

#### IcoPages

- Created IcoPages, or 1-page svg grids of hexagons depicting one face of an
  icosahedral projection of a roughly Earth-sized globe. These are "graph paper"
  templates for use in drawing game maps with Inkscape or other graphics
  software.
- Each face measures 2,400 miles horizontally at its vertical midpoint.
- Each hexagon in the grid measures 120 miles from side to side.
- Each page has an alternate scale equating 120 miles to 44 leagues. These
  leagues are set to 4,800 yards for use with AD&D movement rates in mind.
- Two sets of 20 pages were made, one using a commercially-available Futura font
  and the other using the freely-available Jost* font.

#### Python

- Wrapper script for using `mkhexgrid.exe` in Python.
- Script for using the wrapper with a combination of given data and calculated
  values.
- Sample data files to use with the script.
